---
title: Heat Geek NanoStore
tags: gear
---

wise words

* 110L MiniStore Tall for hot water as minimal room in airing cupboard where boiler lives
* Airing cupboard is 690mm deep, 600mm wide and 2200mm tall. 
* Ministore Tall is a cylinder with 475mm diameter, 1100mm tall. Volume 0.195m³ external, 50mm insulation, internal capacity 110L. 
* Allowing room for pipework round the sides it will just fit. 

{% include candid-image.html src="/assets/images/home-assistant/airing-cupboard.jpg" alt="Airing Cupboard" %}

* MiniStore is small cylinder plumbed in reverse to act as a heat store / "combi"

* NanoStore guinea pigs
  * Offer from Heat Geek to be one of the first NanoStore installs
  * Plate heat exchanger - see Heat Geek video
  * [Nordic Tec BA-115-100](https://nordictec-store.com/ba-115-serie-0115mplate-2-thread-/323-plate-heat-exchanger-nordic-ba-115-100-2-3400kw.html) plate heat exchanger
  * Stores heat in the metal body of the heat exchanger as well as the water inside it
  * More compact, much better energy transfer
  * Two ESBE VTA 370/570 series thermostatic mixing valves, 20-55 degrees range, adjustment knob to select temperature from 1 to 6.
  * One to reduce hot water from the heat exchanger to safe temperature
  * Other plumbed in reverse to act as a diverting valve so that water flowing from the heat pump only goes into the heat exchanger when it's reached a suitable temperature.
  * Discount, free open energy monitoring and guarantee to replace with MiniStore if it didn't work for us

{% include candid-image.html src="/assets/images/home-assistant/original-plumbing-schematic.svg" alt="Plumbing Schematic" %}

* Heat Exchanger much bigger than the one in the video. Based on the external dimensions looks like a [BA-115-170](https://nordictec-store.com/ba-115-serie-0115mplate-2-thread-/1472-plate-heat-exchanger-nordic-ba-115-170-25-6300kw.html). Weighs over 100 Kg so very difficult for two people to maneuver up the stairs and into a narrow cupboard.
* Sitting on floor as too heavy to wall mount. 535mm deep, 253mm wide and 428mm high
* Been heavily insulated and sits on feet so actual dimensions are 620mm deep, 320mm wide and 550mm high. Volume is 0.109m³. Holds about 60L of water total, with the steel body equivalent to another 12.5L. 
* Same volume as a 60L MiniStore XS but higher heat capacity, little less than a regular 80L MiniStore but significantly smaller. 
* Being cuboid leaves more usable space. Occupies space below lower shelf in picture.
* According to Nordic Tec website it's a "large industrial plate heat exchanger" with "significant weight" that is "not a heat exchanger for single-family homes".
* Of course Heat Geek aren't using it in a typical way. Needs to be big enough to act as a heat store for the time it takes for the heat pump to react and build up to full power.
* NanoStore is all about combi-like operation. Water has eight times the heat capacity of steel, so a 110L MiniStore can store much more heat than a 100Kg NanoStore. NanoStore is much better at transferring the heat generated by the heat pump, once it starts running. 
* The one we've got is so much bigger because we have two showers and they want to see whether both can be used simultaneously. Plus installing a range of sizes gives them more data to work out the optimal size for future installs.
* Heat exchanger plus [open energy monitoring level 3](https://shop.openenergymonitor.com/level-3-heat-pump-monitoring-bundle-emonhp/) is £3000 worth of kit, at list prices, so we got a good deal for being guinea pigs.

* Thermal Siphoning
* First proper test on Saturday
* Tail end of Storm Amy, much colder day. Never above 10 degrees, mostly around 8.
* Heat pump running but only for DHW cycles, every 60-90 minutes. No heating cycle at all. 
* Messaged Damon who replied almost instantly. Suggested bumping heat curve right up to 2.2 to give 55 degree flow temp, to force heating to kick in.
* After a long drawn out few minutes it finally kicked in. Took an hour to get house up to temperature. I went back to design heat curve of 0.7.
* House stayed at temperature but behavior was the same. A DHW cycle every 60-90 minutes. No heating cycle. COP around 2.5. 

{% include candid-image.html src="/assets/images/home-assistant/dhw-thermal-siphoning.png" alt="Thermal Siphoning" %}

This is an annotated history graph from Home Assistant. The blue line shows the reported hot water temperature, the red line is the heat pump flow temperature. The blue shading shows when the heat pump is generating heat with the hot water circuit active. The red shading shows when it's generating heat with the heating circuit active. The rest of the time water is being pumped round the heating circuit but the heat pump isn't generating heat.

* Tried increasing hysteresis from 2.5 to 4. Makes no difference. 
* Energy integral never got low enough for heating cycle to start before next DHW cycle.
* Target flow temperature was around 25 degrees and actual flow temperature was about that or higher most of the time
* Where was the heat coming from? Given rapid loss of heat from heat exchanger (without airing cupboard or outside of insulation feeling over warm) seemed most likely that it was escaping into the heating circuit.
* Almost at the same time got a message from Damon saying it was most likely to be thermal siphoning which would need to be fixed by adding no-return check valves to the installation. 
* Turned off the hot water. We can heat on demand when we need it and use immediately.
* Normal heating cycle kicked in after a couple of hours.
* Reasonable COP around 5
* At minimum level heat pump kicks out 3 kW of heat using 600 W of electricity. With a temperature delta of 7 degrees, heat pump was on 50% of the time. Cycle it settled at was 45 minutes on, 45 minutes off. Can tweak the energy integral threshold for starting a new cycle to change cycle length. May try increasing it to see how much more efficient a longer cycle is (and whether it makes room temperature oscillate too much).

* Damon messaged again the following day. Whole team were heading out for a remote week long job but would send one of them back a day early so they can fit the valves on Friday. Also offered to cover my electricity costs until problem sorted.
* Rearranged again to the following Monday
* Belt and braces approach with four check valves. Two spring loaded ones on the inflows and two flutter valves on the outflows.

{% include candid-image.html src="/assets/images/home-assistant/plumbing-schematic.svg" alt="Plumbing Schematic with check valves" %}

* Took an afternoon to do. Needed to alter some of the pipework runs to get long enough straight sections to fit the valves in
* Fired everything up, turned on hot water and heating, crossed fingers.
  
{% include candid-image.html src="/assets/images/home-assistant/dhw-with-check-valves.png" alt="After check valves fitted" %}

* Much better. Holding heat for at least 4 hours.

# Blending Down

{% include candid-image.html src="/assets/images/home-assistant/esbe-vta372-mixing-valve.png" alt="ESBE VTA 370/570 series mixing valves" %}

* Initially hot water blending valve was on max
* Hot water came out scalding and then reduced linearly
* Turned down to 4.5 which seems to be about 45 degrees at the valve, 41 or so at the tap
* After complaints and checking temperatures at all taps and showers ended up at 5.5 out of 6 to give water hot enough for everybody, everywhere.

# Instant Hot Water

* Idea is that NanoStore holds enough heat to provide hot water until the heat pump kicks in and ramps up to full power "combi" mode
* Using shower at natural flow rate. We're at the top of a hill with low water pressure, so not excessive flow. About 8L a minute. 
* Getting 5 minutes of hot water before shower starts to go cold, ending up at around 30 degrees. Not freezing cold but not a pleasant experience. Kept going for another 10 minutes in the name of science. Didn't get any hotter. 

{% include candid-image.html src="/assets/images/home-assistant/shower-8l-55d.png" alt="Shower at 8 L/min with store target 55°C" %}

* Yellow line shows *perceived* hot water temperature. Didn't have a thermometer to hand. Three things jump out.
* Takes 3 minutes from starting shower to DHW demand being signalled. Water had been reheated to 55°C target shortly before test. Sensor is on outside of tank near the cold water inlet. Idea is that it should react quickly when water is drawn off. Down side is that it lags when heating water. Once temperature equalized across store, water was actually at 59°C. With 2.5°C hysteresis below target, temperature has to fall to 52.5°C before DHW triggered.
* During the first 5 minutes of the DHW cycle the store is *losing* heat. The return temperature is higher than the flow temperature. We're 8 minutes into the shower before there's a net heat gain.
* There's a one minute delay from DHW demand to the heat pump starting. It ramps up quickly to its minimum 600W power level. It takes a long 8 minutes for it to get to it's 3300W full power. Barely increasing while the store is actively losing heat then ramping up slightly faster. Once its going full throttle its putting out 9.5kW of heat, equivalent to the average electric shower.

# Hot Water Theory

* How much initial hot water should we expect?
* Store holds 60L of water at around 55°C. There's 30L on the DHW side and 30L on the heat pump side. Turn on the shower, and 30L of water at 55°C flows out, then gets blended down to about 45°C.
* Assume incoming cold water at 10°C. Blending at a 4:1 ratio of hot:cold averages out at 46°C. Giving 37.5L after blending.
* At 8L a minute that's about 4.5 minutes of hot water.
* Cold water enters the heat exchange as the hot water is drawn off. The other side of the heat exchanges is at 55°C, so will warm the incoming water. Let's assume the heat exchanger does its job and raises the water to at least 45°C. That needs an increase of 35°C. The hot side of the heat exchanger holds 30L of water and the equivalent of another 6L in the steel body. Heating 1L of water by 35°C will decrease the temperature of the heat exchange by about 1°C. 
* Around another minute of showering before the temperature is reduced too far for the heat exchanger to work effectively.
* Gives at most 5.5 minutes of hot water which is close to what I experienced.

# Best Case Scenario

* Adam from Heat Geek suggested using water saving shower heads for a 6L a minute flow rate and heating the store to 65°C.
* Blending at 2:1 averages out at 46.5°C, giving 45L after blending.
* At 6L a minute that's about 7.5 minutes of hot water.
* Would then have at most 3 minutes more with the heat exchanger temperature reducing from 65°C to 47°C.
* Will that be enough? Let's put it to the test.

{% include candid-image.html src="/assets/images/home-assistant/shower-6l-65d.png" alt="Shower at 6 L/min with store target 65°C" %}

# Diverting Valve

* Don't know what heat pump diverting valve was initially set to

{% include candid-image.html src="/assets/images/home-assistant/divert-valve-initial.png" alt="DHW cycle with initial setting for divert valve" %}

{% include candid-image.html src="/assets/images/home-assistant/divert-valve-min.png" alt="DHW cycle with min setting for divert valve" %}

* DHW: 0.669kWh consumed, 1.096 generated, COP 1.64. Post heat dump: 1.029 kWh

{% include candid-image.html src="/assets/images/home-assistant/divert-valve-max.png" alt="DHW cycle with max setting (3 visible) for divert valve" %}

* DHW: 0.589kWh consumed, 0.458 generated, COP 0.78. Post heat dump: 1.159 kWh

{% include candid-image.html src="/assets/images/home-assistant/divert-valve-5.png" alt="DHW cycle with max-1 setting (2 visible) for divert valve" %}

{% include candid-image.html src="/assets/images/home-assistant/divert-valve-5-long-shower.png" alt="DHW cycle with max-1 setting, long shower" %}

* Valve not stable! Same valve settings, 10 degree difference in when it starts charging NanoStore.
* Annotated with tank temperature in yellow. Very coarse grained, updates sent by Vaillant sensoCOMFORT at 5 minute intervals.
* Sensor near cold water inlet so can quickly respond to water draw. However, not representative of temperature at hot water outlet, at heat pump inlet or what the current "stored" temperature is. 
* Suspect some correlation between temperature at valve "cold inlet" (connected to NanoStore heat pump inlet) and temperature needed at "hot inlet" (connected to heat pump return flow) for valve to open. 

# Boost Shower Strategy

* Heating to 62 at end of cheap window at 5am still at 42 at 9pm for washing up if no one's had a shower
* Plenty left if there's been a shower cycle during the day

# Costs

* Want small hysteresis so that you get fast response to DHW demand. Top up with hysteresis at 2.5°C is really inefficient.  

{% include candid-image.html src="/assets/images/home-assistant/hot-water-top-up.png" alt="Hot Water Top Up" %}

* This example is adding 5°C to see if that's more efficient. 10 minutes of ramp up time for zero heat gain, 5 minutes gaining heat while flow temperature climbs to 70 degrees, then all the built up heat dumped. Adds 0.3kWh of heat to the store at a COP of 0.5, then dumps 1kWh of built up heat. 
* Boost shower: 10 minute ramp up (0.28 kWh, COP 0.7), 10 minute combi shower (0.56 kWh, COP 3), 7 minutes reheat (0.4 kWh, COP 1.3). Overall 1.25kWh, COP 2. Cost 40p at peak rate, 10p using stored off-peak from home battery.
* Gas combi for same heat would be 2.5kWh gas (assuming 100% efficiency). Looking at our old gas bills (30 minute smart metering) confirms that to be about right. Cost 15p. 
